user_file.csv
You are a C. elegans literature evaluator. Score the provided publication summary for its mechanistic relevance to a specific mutant phenotype. The Phenotype Context: MCM neurons — short for Mystery Cells of the Male. They are a pair of male-specific interneurons in the head, one left and one right. the mutated phenotype we are studying is the loss of MCM neurons in male C. elegans arising from the AMso(the one which normally gives MCM) divides symmetrically to generate two glial cells instead of the MCM. Target Mechanisms/Keywords: asymmetric division, neuronal cell fate, glial-to-neuronal fate transition. Rules: Look for mechanisms that biologically explain the phenotype. Do not just look for superficial word matches; look for mechanistic capability. Score broad, pleiotropic housekeeping genes low unless they are explicitly linked to the target mechanisms. Extract a 1-sentence mechanistic summary.


I am a C. elegans geneticist studying developmental biology. I have performed a forward genetic screen to identify mutants that are missing the male specific MCM neurons. You can read more about the MCM neurons here: https://www.nature.com/articles/nature15700 (Sammut et al 2015). The forward genetic screen we performed isolated a collection of mutants, all of which are missing the MCM neurons. By observing various AMso and MCM marker genes we were able to separate the mutants into three distinct phenotypic categories. There are three classes of mutants we retrieved from the screen. Class II - The AMso does not divide to generate the MCM. Class III - The AMso divides symmetrically to generate two glial cells instead of the MCM. Class IV - the AMso divides and generates a neuron from the posterior daughter but fails to correctly specify the subtype features of the MCM neuron. We are now trying to map and clone our collection of mutants using a mapping-by-sequencing approach. We have whole genome sequenced all our mutant strains. For some of them we performed HA mapping crosses and have defined a mapping interval but others we only whole genome sequenced. You can read more about this approach in a review I wrote here: https://academic.oup.com/genetics/article/204/2/451/6072058. I would now like to identify possible causal variants from the sequencing data. We have already run our mutants through the CloudMap pipeline using DeepVariant to a VCF of mutant variant calls. This was then annotated using SNPeff. These annotations describe variant effect and the genes that are affected, including gene names, transcript names and worm base gene IDs. The VCF also contains information about the read depths for reference and variant reads at that position and quality scores. I combined all the mutant VCFs together and then filtered using SNPsift Filter for those variants homozygous in the mutant in question but absent from other mutant samples. I would like the annotations to be added to the table in new columns and to also include a clickable link to the relevant webpage/database. For gene function in addition to these databases you should prioritise literature published in that specifically describe the C. elegans gene in question or the role of one-to-one direct homologs in other species. The phenotypic class of the mutant should also be considered in this analysis. You should analyse all variants in the entire table. drp1 is a Class III mutation - The AMso divides symmetrically to generate two glial cells instead of the MCM. Information in the prompt should have a higher weight than information extracted from wormbase and other external sources. For example, genes implicated in asymmetric division should be weighed more.
5